this is democracy now I'm Amy Goodman as
we continue to look at US policy in the
Middle East with retired United States
Army Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson who
serves as chief of staff to Secretary of
State Colin Powell from 2002 to 2005
Wilkerson witnessed and participated in
the effort by President George W Bush
vice president Dick Cheney and others to
promote lies to justify the disastrous
illegal invasion of Iraq in 2003 Colonel
Wilkerson helped Secretary of State
Powell prepare his infamous February 5th
2003 speech before the United Nations
Security Council where Powell falsely
claimed Iraq was hiding weapons of mass
destruction Wilkerson and Powell would
later say the CIA lied to them I talked
to Colonel Wilkerson last week and asked
him about the parallels between the
escalation of in the u.s. and Iran today
and the 2003 run-up to war with Iraq
ever since 9/11 the beasts of the
national security state the Beast of
endless wars the Beast of the alligator
that came out of the swamp for example
and bit Donald Trump just a few days ago
is alive and well America exists today
to make war how else do we interpret 19
straight years of war and no end in
sight it's part of who we are it's part
of what the American Empire is we are
going to lie cheat and steal as Pompeo
is doing right now as Trump is doing
right now as Esper is doing right now as
Lindsey Graham is doing right now as Tom
cotton is doing right now and host of
other members of my political party the
Republicans are doing right now we're
going to cheat and steal to do whatever
it is we have to do to continue this war
complex that's the truth of it and
that's the agony of it what we saw
President Trump do was not in president
Trump's character really those boys and
girls who were getting on those planes
at Fort Bragg to augment forces in Iraq
if you look at their faces and even more
importantly if you looked at the faces
of the families a symbol along the line
that they were traversing to get onto
the airplanes you saw a lot of Donald
Trump's base
that base voted for Donald Trump because
he promised to end these endless wars he
promised to drain the swamp well as I
said an alligator from that swamp jumped
out and bit him and when he ordered the
killing of Kasim sulemani he was a
member of the national security state
and good standing and all that state
knows how to do is make war I want to
turn to President Trump we took action
last night to stop a war we did not take
action just start a war George W Bush
had the opportunity to assassinate
sulemani President Obama had the
opportunity to assassinate sulemani they
didn't Trump did and you had dealings
with sulamani you were just explaining
in part one of our discussion what he
did in Afghanistan and how vice
president Pence was lying when he talked
about him being involved in the 9/11
attacks here you have one of the most
egregious things of what we did and one
of the biggest reasons that neither of
the two previous presidents decided to
do what Donald Trump did we have just as
we did with torture from 2002 to 2007
2008 as we substantiated for the world
that torture was okay we have now okayed
the killing of recognized members of
other states government that's what
sulemani was no matter how heinous we
may paint him he was a member of an
established States government and we
assassinated him that is a very
dangerous precedent to have said you may
have heard the members of the Russian
Duma Vladimir Putin himself and others
in Russia talking about this dangerous
precedent had it been the Israelis who
did this Amy they would have done it and
sent flowers to Tehran it would have
been completely covert there were been
no boasting no public slumping of the
chest and so forth that's the narcissist
in the White House that caused that to
happen but even if you were doing it
that way you would have to think about
this consideration that eventually it
would become public that you had done it
and you by doing it had sanctioned the
killing of other state actors now what
we're looking at here for example let's
just put the shoe on the other foot
we're looking at someone coming in to
Washington and assassinating one of our
leaders whether it be a congressman or
remember the executive branch or someone
else we have just sanctioned that we
have become the law of the jungle rather
than as we have been since 1945 the
greatest supporter of international law
and the rule of law in general across
the face of the globe with torture and
with killing other state recognized
individuals of their government we have
become the tiger the lion the bear the
alligator in that jungle it's not a very
very good precedent to have set as the
Russians indicated the Chinese have said
similar things
it's a terrible precedent to have set
and now we have to steel ourselves for
what the reaction might be and as I said
earlier the strategic initiative is now
in Tehran's hands they can decide now
whether or not it's a major escalation
that they perpetrate or just something
that sort of fritters away over time and
doesn't cause the u.s. to execute a
bombing package against the targets for
example that Donald Trump has suggested
I don't want to be in that world but
that's where we are
al-sistani said it best in Iraq I'm also
standing by the way was a big help to us
in 2003 in 2004 when the insurgency was
developing that Donald himself of course
said wasn't there
al Sistani helped and his statement the
other day that he did not want Iraq to
be the battleground of settling scores
was a perfect description of what is
happening Donald Trump is trying to
settle a score and it's everything from
he doesn't want to do what Obama did to
he thinks his maximum tension campaign
is working when it's not that's all it's
about
and incidentally we have another failure
in diplomacy perpetrated by Donald Trump
developing right now in the Korean
Peninsula so wait until you see what the
strategic results are of Kim Jong Un's
posturing on the peninsula and Iran's at
the same time we used to have a saying
in the Pentagon when we were doing
war planning we hope that the North
Koreans and the Iraqis at that time now
the Iranians don't decide to collude and
attack at the same time well Donald
Trump has set that kind of strategic
situation up now with two major
diplomatic failures mostly because of
the narcissism and the lack of
confidence that he himself is exhibited
but also because of the national
security state and its desire to keep
these wars going can you elaborate on
what sulemani did back when you were in
the bush administration you were working
with him
well what we had in the first days of
our reaction in Afghanistan was not
really a military action it was a CIA
action Donald Rumsfeld actually got
furious with the army because he
couldn't get into Afghanistan fast
enough if you look at a map you will see
why I couldn't get into Afghanistan fast
enough of course we had to go over to
Pakistan it was Becca Stein and asked
them for old flight rights and for
logistics rights and so forth in order
to even get in Afghanistan but what you
had was you had essentially a war
between the Taliban mullah omar and his
group what was left of al Qaeda and the
Northern Alliance which the CIA had been
supporting all along they had killed
Massoud the Lion of Panjshir the guy who
was really leading the Northern Alliance
to al-qaeda had killed him about the
same time they did the 9/11 attacks so
it was really chaotic when we did get
some special operators in and we got a
lot of aircraft in with of course
precision guided munitions then we began
to turn the tide and we began to get to
a situation where I can tell you we were
all almost apoplectic at the time we
didn't know who was going to invest
Kabul we didn't know that we hadn't just
turned Kabul over to the Northern
Alliance and bus to a continuation of
the last 30 years of warfare so we were
very anxious to make sure everything
worked the way we wanted it to after
that so-called victory and one of the
people one of the groups that helped us
the most as you might imagine we're the
Iranians because the Iranians looked at
the Taliban as their enemy - you may
recall that the Taliban had killed some
Iranian diplomats and others in the
months prior so the Iranians were
all four are eliminating the Taliban as
the legitimate government of Afghanistan
and so pitched in to help as I said once
President Bush had given his speech
about the axis of evil and included Iran
in that but their desire to help was not
quite as ardent as it was before but
they nonetheless realizing as Iran
almost always does I hate these people
who say they're irrational they're far
more rational than we are let me say
that again the leadership in Tehran is
far more rational than the leadership in
Washington so they decided they would
continue to help us because after all
the any of my enemy you know all that
old good business about the enemy of my
enemy is my friend
and and they did in fact continue to
help us all the way through the Bonn
conference and sulemani was part of that
at the time you just said Esper pence
Pompeyo Trump explain what they're lying
about right now as we hear them talk
about he was just about to engage in
another attack on US personnel well the
first thing they're lying about is a
military professional and I know I know
cold no general especially not one at
the level that sulemani was operating no
general reaches out and kill someone nor
does he reach out to a team and say kill
someone nor does he reach out to a squad
or a platoon or a company and say kill
someone he gives orders at the top set
strategic purposes and principles and
general guidelines and boosts morale and
he travels around and he talks to the
teams and so exactly what sulemani was
so good at so to say that sulemani
himself personally was an imminent
threat is as I said before laughable and
the fact that Esper and Pompeyo who have
some manner of expertise in military
affairs are saying these things makes
them even more egregious Liars than
otherwise if John Kerry got up there and
said something like that or if Warren
Christopher got up there and said
something about Kerry even with his
Vietnam experience you could you could
give them a little bit of leeway but
these guys are super
to be experts in the very fields that
they're talking about they're anything
but experts they are war mongers they
are war mongers par excellence Mike
Pompeo and vice-president pence they
both long for the rapture for the end
times for Jesus coming down to the earth
and killing all the unbelievers with his
flaming sword this is what they are all
about this is why they allowed the
embassy to move to Jerusalem go back and
check the remarks that were made at that
time the prayers that were given and so
forth this is in a word a very different
US administration but in the same hands
of the military-industrial complex of
the national security state of all the
people who want warfare to be the raison
d'etre of this Empire at the same time
so you're you're looking at an
incompetent leadership coupled with a
leadership that's ruthless and brutal
and knows where it wants to go and with
Iran its regime change period and if
they have to go to war that's what they
want and now they've got it to the point
where it's going to be extremely
difficult I'd put the chances at 50/50
for us to extricate ourselves from this
march to war and this war will put Iraq
to shame in terms of its consequences in
blood and treasure so I want to go to
the reasons for it and I know you have
to leave so we'll do this quickly 2020
presidential hopeful Elizabeth Warren
was speaking on CNN's State of the Union
with Jake Tapper next week the President
of the United States could be facing an
impeachment trial in the Senate we know
he's deeply upset about that and I think
people are reasonably asking why this
moment why does he pick now to take this
highly inflammatory highly dangerous
action that moves us closer to war we've
been at war for 20 years in the middle
east we need to stop the war in the
Middle East not expansion are you
suggesting the president Trump pulled
the trigger and had Qasem Soleimani
killed as a distraction from his from
impeachment look I think people are
reasoning
asking about the timing and why it is
that the administration seems to have
all kinds of different answers
so that's presidential candidate senator
Elizabeth Warren last week right after
the assassination the oscar-winning
filmmaker Michael Moore tweeted the New
York Times front page from December 17
1998 the front page banner headline red
impeachment vote in house delayed as
Clinton launches Iraq airstrike citing
military need to move swiftly Colonel
Wilkerson can you respond for 15 years
Amy I've taught this to over 400
students on two campuses national
security decision-making is what it's
called one of the influences I emphasize
is domestic politics I would be a
traitor to the academic curriculum which
I teach I would be a traitor to the
truth if I didn't say of course that had
something to do with it and watch out
because there will be more because there
will be more impeachment any final words
Colonel Wilkerson as we move into this
very critical period with President
Trump saying if Iran responds to the
u.s. assassination of one of their
leaders
that the US will hit 52 sites including
cultural institutions which is by the
way considered a war crime 52 for the 52
hostages
Iran took more than 40 years ago if that
were the case and we actually executed
such a package we would solidify 80
million people in a way that for the
next 30 years would cost the lives of
countless Americans businesspeople
tourists and so forth throughout the
region and perhaps throughout the world
I know what the packages look like for
bombing Iran I worked to work on the
Soviets as they invaded Afghanistan and
we thought they were going to
drive south to Chava Horeb under a bus
to warm water ports in Iran so I did
some of the battle planning for fighting
the Soviets in Iran I know the territory
I know the strategic depth I know the
mountains and so forth I can tell you
right now that the bombing packages that
we have that will call on out your deed
and multi-carrier operations in the
northern sea of Oman and Khalif in Saudi
Arabia
Incirlik perhaps in Turkey and so forth
are not designed to do that so if they
are designed to do that in other words
modified and if they do that we will
have started a catastrophe in the Middle
East that will make as I said Iraq
looked like child's play retired United
States Army Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson
who serves as chief of staff to
Secretary of State Colin Powell during
the invasion of Iraq to see part one of
the interview go to democracynow.org
coming up next about a hundred fifty
people were arrested Friday at the
climate protests in Washington we'll
hear from Jane Fonda Naomi Klein Bill
McKibben Ariel Doran Shea Tara Houska
and Joaquin Phoenix he was arrested too
and he was just nominated for an Oscar
stay with us
you